Hydrogen fluoride is a chemical compound with the chemical formula HF.
HF is widely used in the petrochemical industry as a component of superacids.
Hydrogen fluoride boils near room temperature, much higher than other hydrogen halides.
Unlike other hydrogen halides, HF is lighter than air.
The gas can also cause blindness by rapid destruction of the corneas.
French chemist Edmond Frémy (1814–1894) is credited with discovering anhydrous hydrogen fluoride while trying to isolate fluorine.
Although Carl Wilhelm Scheele prepared hydrofluoric acid in large quantities in 1771, this acid was known in the glass industry before then.
Although a diatomic molecule, HF forms relatively strong intermolecular hydrogen bonds.
Acidity Unlike other hydrohalic acids, such as hydrochloric acid, hydrogen fluoride is only a weak acid in dilute aqueous solution.
[13] This leads to protonation of very strong acids like hydrochloric, sulfuric, or nitric when using concentrated hydrofluoric acid solutions.
[14] Although hydrofluoric acid is regarded as a weak acid, it is very corrosive, even attacking glass when hydrated.
[19] However, Giguère and Turrell[20][21] have shown by infrared spectroscopy that the predominant solute species is the 
hydrogen-bonded ion pair [H3O+·F-], 
which suggests that the ionization can be described as a pair of successive equilibria:  The first equilibrium lies well to the 
right (K » 1) and the second to the left (K « 1),
 meaning that HF is extensively dissociated, but that the tight ion pairs reduce the thermodynamic activity coefficient of H3O+, 
so that the solution is effectively less acidic.
[17][18]  Solvent Dry hydrogen fluoride readily dissolves low-valent metal fluorides as well as several molecular fluorides.
Many proteins and carbohydrates can be dissolved in dry HF and recovered from it.
[25]  Production and uses Hydrogen fluoride is produced by the action of sulfuric acid on pure grades of the mineral fluorite and also 
as a side-product of the extraction of the 
fertilizer precursor phosphoric acid from various minerals.
See also hydrofluoric acid.
HF serves as a catalyst in alkylation processes in oil refineries.
A component of high-octane petrol (gasoline) called "alkylate" is generated in alkylation units that combine C3 and C4 olefins and
 iso-butane to generate petrol (gasoline).
The process involves dehydrogenation of n-paraffins to olefins, and subsequent reaction with benzene using HF as catalyst.
The potassium bifluoride is needed because anhydrous hydrogen fluoride does not conduct electricity.
Several million kilograms of F2 are produced annually.
[28]  Acyl chlorides or acid anhydrides react with hydrogen fluoride to give acyl fluorides.
[29]  HF is often used in palynology to remove silicate minerals, for extraction of dinoflagellate cysts, acritarchs and chitinozoans.
1,1-Difluoroethane is produced by the mercury-catalyzed addition of hydrogen fluoride to acetylene:[30]  The intermediate in this 
process is vinyl fluoride or fluoroethylene, 
the monomeric precursor to polyvinyl fluoride.
